# Ruby Swagger

A super simple library to read or create [Swagger](http://swagger.io/) API documents.
This is the engine used in other gems to translate API definitions (grape, rails) into Swagger definitions.

Note: Only Swagger Version 2.0 of the spec is supported.

## Install

You can install the gem as

```
gem install ruby-swagger
```

or adding it to your bundle:

```
gem 'ruby-swagger'
```

and then

```
bundle install
```

If you are using ruby-swagger inside a Grape project, make sure the ruby-swagger is defined after grape in your gemfile.
If you have problem finding the extended methods, you can manually require it with:

```
require 'ruby-swagger'
require 'ruby-swagger/grape/grape'
```

and then bundle install.

## What you get

This gem provides mostly 2 independent services for your ruby swagger documentation.

1. It provides an object-oriented implementation of the [Swagger 2.0 Specification](https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-spec/blob/master/versions/2.0.md) This part of the gem - under swagger/data - allows you to manipulate Swagger-2.0 documents in an object-oriented way

2. A set of tasks and grape extensions to convert your grape API documentation into a Swagger 2.0 documentation. Using these tasks you can:

  (a) extract, from the Grape API structure, a file system representation in YAML of your documentation.
This is not your final documentation (yet) but, similarly to Jakyll, you can now have other parties (technical writer) editing and maintaining
your documentation in a yaml-like version. These tasks allow you to maintain the YAML version of your documentation up-to-date with the Grape definition of your API.

  (b) extend the Grape syntax of the API defining OAuth2 scopes, errors, permissions, deprecation, etc. These extensions are read by this library
and included in your documentation

  (c) compile the Swagger 2.0 documentation from the YAML version of your documentation. This is the final artifact that you can deploy
under public/ or distribute in other ways (CDN on S3)

  (d) auto generate all the API clients by running the swagger-codegen task. You can distribute the API clients on public/ or using other ways (CDN on S3?)

  (e) you can automate a+b+c+d+e in your continuous deployment so your documentation and clients are always up-to-date

## Usage

Assuming you have included the gem into your Gemfile, you should see a new swagger: namespace into your rake tasks. For example, running `rake -T`:

```
...
rake swagger:compile_doc                                   
rake swagger:compile_clients:...
rake swagger:grape:generate_doc[base_class]               
...
```

### Extracting the documentation from your Grape API

You can run the command

```
rake swagger:grape:generate_doc[base_class]  
```

where base_class is the root class of your API definition in Grape.

For example, if all your API is mounted into a "APIBase" class:

```
rake swagger:grape:generate_doc[ApiBase]  
```

will extract all the documentation from all the routes coming from that base class.

This task will create by default a new directory structure under ./doc/swagger - this directory will contain all the YAML documentation of your project.

See below for the structure.

#### YAML documentation structure

Your documentation will be structured in a set of YAML files - you can edit parts of it. In the parts that you can edit, you can use the ERB syntax - for example: `host: <%= ENV['host'] %>`.

The ./doc/swagger is structured in the following way:

* ./doc/swagger/base_doc.yml

  This file is written *only the first time* you execute the `rake swagger:grape:generate_doc` task and never overwritten. This file contains
all the basic information for your API: the author, contact information, license, base URL, version, security schemes, format, etc.
It is equivalent to the [basic object of Swagger](https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-spec/blob/master/versions/2.0.md#swagger-object).
Once it is created is never updated by ruby-swagger tasks, so it is your duty to manually change any of the contact information, license, etc.

* ./doc/swagger/securityDefinitions.yml

  This file is written *only the first time* you execute the `rake swagger:grape:generate_doc` task and never overwritten. This files contains the security
definitions of your API and it is equivalent to the [securityDefinitions object of swagger](https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-spec/blob/master/versions/2.0.md#securityDefinitionsObject)
Once it is created is never updated by ruby-swagger tasks, so it is your duty to manually change any of the contact information, license, etc.

* ./doc/swagger/scopes (folder)

  Define the OAuth2 scopes of the API (optional). This file gets regenerated by the `rake swagger:grape:generate_doc` task at each run. However, the description part is left untouched.

* ./doc/swagger/paths (folder)

  This folder contains a structure of subfolders that is 1-1 mapped with your API. Each folder represent a path component in your route.
Each file name is the verb whose that path is accessible from. The API version and API prefix is stripped when generating the file system structure.

  **Example #1**: if you have a GET API available at /api/v1/users/activity, you will have a ./doc/swagger/paths/users/activity/get.yml file containing the documentation for that API method.

  **Example #2**: if you have a POST API method available at /api/v1/users, you will have a ./doc/swagger/paths/users/post.yml file containing the documentation for that API method.

  Within each file there is the full definition of the API operation. When you execute the `rake swagger:grape:generate_doc` task,
some properties will be overwritten by the Grape documentation - some will not. This means you can edit the documentation from the YAML file
while the structural properties of the API are still reflecting the Grape definition.

  The following properties are NOT overwritten by the rake task:

  * summary
  * description

  Everything else gets regenerated by the rake task.

You can check in your ./doc/swagger structure in Github and have other parties work with you on the documentation.
You can regenerate / reupdate the documentation rerunning the `rake swagger:grape:generate_doc` task. You can have this task running as part of your continuous deployment or have it running as post git hook.

### Extracting the documentation from your Grape API

Assuming you have generated your documentation using `swagger:grape:generate_doc`, you can now compile the entire documentation into a valid
Swagger 2.0 file. You can do that by running the task

```
rake swagger:compile_doc
```

This task will read all the documentation definition under ./doc/swagger/ and produce a single swagger file under ./doc/swagger/swagger.json

This is your Swagger 2.0 documentation. You can now move this file under /public (if you want to distribute it like this) or upload it
on S3, CDN, etc. This is the live definition of your API.

Each time you run the `swagger:compile_doc task`, the swagger.json file is regenerated (overwritten). You can check in the swagger.json file under your version control system.

### Auto generate clients

You can use the `rake swagger:generate_client:all` task.

### Grape extensions

This gem includes a number of Grape DSL extensions and method helpers that you can use when defining your API.

#### The api_desc helper method

This helper method allows you to extend the "desc" method for Grape and let you define more context for your API method. This is an example of API
definition using the api_desc method (rather than the Grape desc method):

```ruby
    api_desc 'Retrieves applications list', { opt: 'a' } do
      detail 'This API does this and that and more'     #You can use GFM (Github Flavored Markdown) here
      headers authentication_headers.merge('X-Content' => {description: 'A custom header', type: 'String'})
      scopes %w(application:read application:write)     #You can use a string or an array of string
      tags 'applications'   # You can use a string or an array of string
      deprecated true       # Turn on the deprecation warning
      hidden false          # If true, it is excluded from the documentation   
      api_name 'get_applications'   # A unique name for the API method. Used for autogenerating clients or doc
      response ApplicationEntity, root: 'applications', isArray: true, headers: result_headers  
      errors std_errors.merge("418" => {entity: ErrorBoomEntity, description: "Yes, I am a teapot"})
    end
    params do
      ...
    end
    get '/' do
    ...
    end
```

The helper has the same syntax of the "desc" Grape method when defining an API operation.
It supports a short description as first parameter, an optional hash of parameters (where, for example, you can define which headers your API support) and a block.
The block extends your definition mapping it to your Swagger documentation. The allowed extensions in the api_desc block are:

  * **detail** String (in GFM format) - Set the documentation for the API method
  * **headers** Hash - A hash containing headers supported in the request
  * **deprecated** True|False - If set to true, the method will be marked as deprecated in the Swagger documentation. Default: false
  * **hidden** True|False - If set to true, the method will be excluded by the documentation
  * **scopes** String|Array of strings - Defines OAuth2 scopes the method will need to satisfy. Default: nil
  * **tags** String|Array of strings - List of tags used to organize your documentation. Default: nil
  * **api_name** String - A unique name for the API. Used in building the documentation or the auto-clients
  * **response** Entity and Hash - An object representing the expected result of the method when the operation is successful. You can optionally provide the root of the object and if the result is an array. You can also include the response headers. Default: nil
  * **errors** Hash - A key/value representation of the errors the method can raise. The key is an http error code, the value is an hash. The keys are: entity (the object used to incapuslate the error), description is the documentation of the error

#### The api_present helper method

If you are using the api_desc method, you can use the api_present helper in your API definition instead of using the present method.
For example:

```
    api_desc 'Retrieves applications list' do
      response ApplicationEntity, root: 'applications'
    end
    get '/' do
      api_present Application.all
    end
```

The api_present helper will take care of wrapping the Application model into an ApplicationEntity and use the 'applications' key root in the api response.


## Note on Patches/Pull Requests

* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version unintentionally.
* Submit a pull request.

## Help

If you have found a bug or you want to get in touch with us, write an email to <open@gild.com>.

## Special thanks

* [brennovich](https://github.com/brennovich)
